}
Rama stood on the field of battle, exhausted and battle-weary.
He looked upon the forces of Ravana drawn up with vigor, and his thoughts filled with apprehension.
}
The divine Rishi Agastya had joined the company of the gods to witness the battle.
Seeing Rama absorbed in worry, he approached Rama and spoke.
}
O Rama, mighty-armed Rama! Listen carefully, my child, to this eternal secret.
This secret by which one becomes victorious over all in battle.
}
O Rama, mighty-armed Rama! Listen carefully, my child, to this eternal secret.
The Aditya-Hridayam, this prayer to the heart of the Sun, bestows a sacred blessing to vanquish every foe.
Chanted daily, this supremely auspicious mantra will bring you victory and inexhaustible happiness.
}
This sacred hymn is foremost amongst all auspicious verses and guarantees the destruction of all sins.
It gives relief from all anxiety and sorrow, it is the ultimate panacea which bestows the longevity of life.
}
Rising over the horizon crowned with brilliant rays of light, he is revered by both the devas and asuras alike.
Worship the sun-god, Vivasvan, the one who is the radiant lord of the universe.
}
He is the very confluence of all Gods, the brilliant one whose essence is light.
His falling rays nourish the worlds of the Devas and the Asuras and all in between.
}
He is the creator Brahma, the protector Vishnu and the destroyer Shiva. He is the war-god Skanda and the lord of all creatures Prajapati.
He is the great king of heaven Indra and Kubera lord of riches. He is Kala who is time itself and Yama who is death. He is the moon-god Soma and Varuna lord of all waters.
}
Within him are the Pitrs (ancestors of man) and the Vasus (incandescent lords of nature). Within him are the Sadhyas (the manifestations of ritual) and the Aswins (divine twin physicians). Within him range the Maruts (fierce storm gods) and Manu (the first man).
He is the wind-god Vayu and the fire-god Agni. He is the life breath of all beings, creator of the seasons and the bestower of light.
}
He is the son of Aditi (the goddess of the cosmos). He is called Savita (the progenitor), Surya (the Sun-god), Khagah (the one who traverses the heavens), Pusha (the soul-guide who nourishes) and Gabhastiman (the rain-bringer).
He is lustrous like gold, he is the golden seed which brings the bright day.
}
His chariot is pulled by seven emerald horses, a thousand times filled with seven rays. He is Mariciman, the resplendent one.
He churns away the darkness with brilliant light. He is Shambu (the benign joy-giver), he is Martanda (the dead egg of mortality), he is Ansuman (the life in the wind).
}
He is Hiranyagarbha, the primordial golden egg. Seated in endless winter, he is known as Bhaskara (the illuminator) and Ravi (the energetic one).
This fire-wombed son of Aditi blows a conch which destroys the frost.
}
Lord of the sky, breaker of darkness, he has mastery over the Rigveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda.
A friend of all waters, he sends torrential rains and bounds swiftly over the Vindhya mountains.
}
The scorching one whose form is circular, who is death incarnate, colored yellow-red; he warms all things.
With his great brilliance and affection for all, this divine poet, blood-red, is the cause of all work.
}
Lord of stars, planets and all constellations, he inspires the universe into existence.
Most resplendent among all that shines, we salute the one who appears in twelve forms.
}
Salutations to the one rising at the mountains of the east, Salutations to the one setting at the mountains of the west.
We salute the Lord of the luminary bodies in the heavens, that lord of day.
}
Hail to you, the bestower of victory, hail to you, the joy born of victory!
Hail to the lord of green horses, hail to the thousand-rayed one, O son of Aditi!
}
Salutations to the fierce and terrible one, to the eminent hero, the one that has varigated hues.
Salutations to the one whose appearance makes the lotus blossom. Salutations to Martanda, the one who makes men live.
}
Salutations to the Lord of Brahma, Shiva and Vishnu, salutations to the sun-god Surya, the Aditya who has radiant splendor.
Salutations to shining one who has the fearsome body of Rudra which consumes all,
}
Salutations to the one who dispels darkness,  destroys frost, and destroys all foes, the immeasurable Atman.
Salutations to the destroyer of the ungrateful and to the Lord of all those who shine.
}
Salutations to the Lord who has splendor like molten gold, to the transcendental fire, the fire of supreme knowledge, the architect of the universe, destroyer of darkness and salutations again to the efflugence that is the Cosmic witness.
Salutations to the Lord who destroys everything and creates them again. Salutations to Him who by His rays consumes the waters, heats them up and sends them down as rain.
}
Salutations to the Lord who abides in the heart of all beings keeping awake when they are asleep. He is both the sacrificial fire and the fruit enjoyed by the worshippers.
The Sun is verily the Lord of all action in this universe. He is verily the vedas, the sacrifices mentioned in them and the fruits obtained by performing the sacrifices.
}
Raghava, one who recites this hymn in times of danger, during an affliction or when lost in the wilderness and having fear, he will not lose heart (and become brave).
Raghava, worship this Lord of all Gods and the Universe with one-pointed devotion. Recite this hymn thrice and you will win this battle.
}
O mighty armed one, you shall truimph over Ravana this very moment. Having spoken this, Agastya returned his original place.
Raghava became free from worry after hearing this. He was greatly pleased and became brave and energetic.
}
Gazing at the sun with devotion, He recited this hymn thrice and experienced bliss. Purifying Himself by sipping water thrice, He took up His bow with His mighty arms.
Seeing Ravana coming to fight, He put forth all his effort with a determination to destroy Ravana.
}
Then knowing that the destruction of the lord of prowlers at night (Ravana) was near, Aditya, who was at the center of the assembly of the Gods, looked at Rama and exclaimed 'Hurry up' with great delight.
} 0